JUDY WOODRUFF: A new documentary is reigniting
questions about the life and legacy of pop
icon Michael Jackson.
John Yang has the story.
And we want to warn you that some may find
the details disturbing.
JOHN YANG: Nearly a decade after his death,
multiple Grammy winner Michael Jackson's music
and showmanship can still cast a magical spell.
But questions about his private life can still
cast a dark shadow.
In 1994, Jackson paid more than $20 million
to settle a lawsuit alleging he sexually molested
a 13-year-old boy.
And, in 2005, he was acquitted on 10 counts
of child molestation, serving alcohol to a
minor, conspiracy and kidnapping.
Now accusations of inappropriate conduct are
back in the headlines with "Leaving Neverland"
a two-part four-hour documentary to be broadcast
Sunday and Monday on HBO.
The film tells the stories of James Safechuck
and Wade Robson.
Robson, a dance teacher who did choreography
for NSYNC and Britney Spears, says Jackson
initiated him to sex when he was 7 years old,
and the pop star was 31.
He alleges the behavior continued for seven
years.
WADE ROBSON, Michael Jackson Accuser: And
he started talking about how much he loves
me.
What this is, is us, and how we show our love
for each other, that other people are ignorant,
and they're stupid, and they'd never understand.
If they ever found out what they were doing
about this sexual stuff, that he and I would
be pulled apart and we would never be able
to see each other again, and that he and I
would go to jail for the rest of our lives.
JOHN YANG: Safechuck, a former child actor
who appeared with Jackson in a Pepsi commercial,
says Jackson abused him over six years, beginning
when he was 10.
JAMES SAFECHUCK, Michael Jackson Accuser:
Secrets will eat you up.
You feel so alone.
JOHN YANG: Their families tell how Jackson
won their trust.
WOMAN: He just came across as a loving, caring,
kind soul.
It was easy to believe that he was just that.
JOHN YANG: And how they feel about him now.
LAURA SAFECHUCK, Wife of James Safechuck:
Michael's gone, but it doesn't change the
fact that he destroyed these people, and that
the world still goes on loving him.
JOHN YANG: On "CBS This Morning" this week,
Jackson's family launched a preemptive strike
against the film and the accusers.
MAN: We know our brother.
And Michael wouldn't do anything like that.
And then he waits until after the passing
of Michael, 10 years later, just to come out
and to state his?
And he's -- they're still in court with -- with
the estate, suing them for hundreds of millions
of dollars.
JOHN YANG: Jackson's estate is suing HBO for
$100 million.
It claims the film violates a non-disparagement
clause in a deal the network made in 1992
to broadcast a Jackson concert.
In a statement, HBO said: "Despite the desperate
lengths taken to undermine the film, our plans
remain the same."
To discuss the film, the director, Dan Reed,
the director, joins us now.
Dan, thanks so much for your time.
What was your intent?
Why did you want to tell this story?
DAN REED, Director, "Leaving Neverland": The
intent rose out of an opportunity, which was
my accidental discovery of Wade and James,
Wade Robson and James Safechuck, who I read
about as the plaintiffs in a civil suit against
the Jackson estate.
So here were two young men who claimed that,
as children, they had been sexually molested
by the singer.
It seemed to me here was an opportunity to
try and find out if these guys had something
true to say, whether they were genuine.
And, if they were genuine, perhaps there was
a way to finally delve a bit deeper into this
controversy that had lasted for so long.
JOHN YANG: How did you determine or how did
you satisfy yourself that they were genuine
now?
DAN REED: Well, the reason why Wade in particular,
because Wade was an adult when he testified
in Jackson's favor in 2005 during the criminal
trial, the reason why Wade changed his story
-- and that's what it looks like, and I can
understand why people query that -- that story
of Wade's awakening is the story of the film.
That's -- you know, it takes four hours to
unpack that.
And when you reduce it to its simplest, Wade,
as a child and as a victim of Michael Jackson,
formed a deep attachment to his abuser.
He fell in love with Michael, and that relationship
shaped his teenage years and his adult life,
up to, you know, until his mid-20s.
So he's 22.
He stands up in court, and he knocks it out
of the park in defense of Michael.
And he is defense witness number one, and
probably one of the important reasons why
Michael was acquitted of the child sex abuse
charges of the 13-year-old Gavin Arvizo.
So, why did he change his mind?
Well, he didn't want his mentor, his -- the
man that he had been in a sexual relationship
with, his idol, the man he really admired,
he didn't want him to go to jail.
And so he lied.
And then it wasn't until a few years later
that he had a child of his own, he had a young
son, and he describes the moment when he looks
at his son, and he imagines Michael doing
to his son the things that Michael did to
him, to Wade, as a 7-year-old, and becomes
enraged, and can't stand the thought.
And then that -- that prompts him to look
deeper into the way he thought about his own
relationship with Michael.
And that's when he started beginning to consider
it as abuse, because, up to that point, it
was just like a special relationship with
Michael that had a sexual component, but was
also about a bunch of other things and was
deep emotional attachment.
JOHN YANG: We mentioned the lawsuit from the
Jackson estate against HBO.
The Jackson estate also complains that you
didn't go to them to get their side of the
story for any sort of response.
What's your response to that?
DAN REED: Well, let's think about this for
more than a second.
I don't make any allegations about the Michael
Jackson estate in my film.
They're barely mentioned.
I don't say that they molested children.
So, why would I go to them for comment?
They don't know anything of any use about
what happened behind a locked bedroom door
between, let's say, Wade Robson at the age
of 7 and Michael Jackson.
What the Jackson family do admit is that Michael
spent many nights, many, many nights, in bed
in the company of little boys.
You know, they have never really disputed
that.
And so -- and they have not disputed that
Wade and James had long acquaintance -- acquaintances
or friendships, if you like, with Michael.
So, there are many, many facts about this
story that are easily corroborated.
But the central fact is the question of what
happened behind those closed doors.
That's the central question of the film.
And I don't think that the family or the estate
have anything useful to say about that.
And they also have a massive interest and
a big financial vested interest in trying
to cover it up.
So, they certainly weren't credible or impartial
witnesses in the story.
JOHN YANG: So much of the reason for all this
attention to the film is Michael Jackson.
But, as a viewer, I found most affecting the
story of these two young men and the effect
that this had on them and their families.
And I would like to play a little bit of James
Safechuck talking about the effect it had
on him as an adult.
JAMES SAFECHUCK: One of the weird things is
not liking yourself and not knowing why.
Like, I didn't know why I had these problems
or felt these ways, constant anxiety and depression,
and not knowing why you are like that.
JOHN YANG: Now, he could be talking about
the effects of something at the hands of a
priest, a teacher, a coach.
It doesn't have to be a celebrity.
Talk a little bit about that part of the film.
DAN REED: Well, what this film is really about
is two families coming to terms with the disclosure
of a long-held and very dark secret, which
is there -- the sexual abuse of their sons
at the hands of Michael Jackson.
Now, it's not about Michael, it's not about
-- it doesn't really matter that this was
a pop star.
I mean, I guess of course it matters, because
this is a story that now is important and
significant because of because of Michael's
magnitude in our culture.
But this could easily have been a story about
an uncle or a priest or any trusted figure,
any figure of authority that a mother or father
might trust to spend time with their child.
And that's how I want people to see this film.
I think it's a -- it's a valuable document
which chronicles, over two decades, the story
of a family's entanglement with a predatory
pedophile.
And that pedophile, as I say, could be anybody.
And I think that's what I want people to take
away from this film, like, this could be anybody,
and this is how it happens.
They don't grab you.
It's not a guy in a dirty trench coat waiting
at the school gates who bundles the child
into a van or an alley.
It's your -- it's the man or the woman that
you trust with your child.
One of the things you need to watch out for
as a parent is anybody who takes -- who pays
more attention to your child than you would
normally do, and anyone who takes -- who seems
to have more care about your child than is
normal.
And he said, that's a real telltale sign.
So I would like people to watch this film
and kind of be educated about how child sexual
abuse and grooming really happens.
JOHN YANG: Dan Reed, director of "Leaving
Neverland," which is on Sunday and Monday
night on HBO, thanks a lot, Dan.